So, now let us analyze Dijkstra’s algorithm
for the single source shortest path problem.
So, recall that Dijkstra's algorithm operates
by burning vertices in the analogy we used.
So, we keep track of vertices which have burnt
or visited initially nothing is visited and
initially we do not know any distance to any
vertex. So, we have assumes all distances
that at infinity. When we start at the source
vertex, let us call it 1 by assumption. So,
we set its distance to 0. Then, we repeatedly
pickup the first vertex which is not burnt
and which has the minimum distance among those
which are not burnt, visit it and recompute
the distance to all its neighbors.
So, before we look at the complexity of these
algorithms, we actually first have to verify
that it is correct. So, Dijkstra's algorithms
now make the sequences of updates. It is a
bit analogous to bfs or dfs, because it keeps
visit in vertices and it visits every vertex
only once. Now, its visits vertices in a particular
order which is different from breadth first
or the depth first, and we need to justify
that this order is actually correct. So, in
some sense at every point, breadth first search
looks all its neighbors and visits them say
in the order of their vertex number. Depth
first search will pick the first neighbor,
and then explore it further.
Now, Dijkstra algorithm uses the different
strategy which is to pick the first, the smallest
distance and visited neighbor. So, we have
to justify that this choice which is never
under, that is which keep going forward, and
you never go back and say hope maybe I should
have chose a different one that this kind
of strategy actually is correct. So, this
is a general class of algorithms called greedy
algorithms where you have a number of possible
trajectories or parts that you can choose
to solve the problem. At each stage you make
the next choice based on some local information.
At this point, this looks like the best choice
to make, and then somehow magically this best
choice that you make on local information
turns out to be globally the best trajectory
to take. So, for such greedy algorithm, it
is important to establish that this local
choice of the next step actually gives us
a global optimum, because very often this
kind of a local heuristic does not give us
a correct algorithm.
So, let us first look at the correctness of
Dijkstra algorithm. So, the key to establishing
correctness in this particular case is to
establishes what is called an invariant, right.
So, now, the Dijkstra algorithm proceeds as
we saw in a sequence of iteration. They are
n iteration. The invariant is that at each
iteration, we have this characterization of
vertices as burnt and unburnt. What you want
to claim is that the burnt vertices are correctly
solved, that is at any point if we look at
the distances assigned to the vertices in
the burnt set, then those distances are actually
the shortest distance in the source vertices
to that burnt vertex. So, if we assume that
this inductive invariant is true, now it is
certainly true at the beginning because at
the beginning, the only vertex that we have
burnt is the start vertex s, right. So, the
first vertex we burnt is s and we set its
distance to 0. So, certainly at that point
this property is true that among the burnt
vertices, the distances are in fact the shortest
distances.
Now, assuming that we have extended it say
for a few vertices, now we want to add a new
one. So, what we said is that we will pick
a vertex v, such that if we look at the distance
to x plus the weight of x v, if you look at
this total sum which will be updated distance
to v, this is smallest among all the vertices
which are not burnt. So, the claim is that
if we now add this to our burnt set, right
so we extended are burnt set like this by
include v, then, the distance of v cannot
be actually smaller than what we have computed
now and we could not change because of a later
update. So, how will it change because of
the later update, it could be that some later
point we actually extend a burnt set and included
a new w. Now, can it be that there was a path
from y to w to v which is shorter than a path
we claimed just now via x to v. So, it is
easy to see that the distance to y plus the
cost of wxy. Now, this must be bigger than
or equal to the earlier thing because we choose
v and not w because at this point w was not
the smallest one, v was. Perhaps they were
equal, but certainly w was not less than v.
So, at a later stage if you go to w, we know
that we will take at least that much time
to reach w. Then, we have to additionally
incur a cost of going from w to v. So, there
is no way that a later path if we can discover
via y to w to v can be better than the correct
path next, right. So, this reestablishing
the invariant that the vertex we burnt next
is correctly solved. So, this is a way to
show that Dijkstra greedy strategy actually
solves this problem correctly.
So, now having established that it is correct,
let us look at the complexity. So, there are
some obvious loops in this. So, there is a
first, there is an order n loop of initializing
the visited values to false and distances
to infinity. Now, there is another order n
loop here and inside this order n loop, there
are two loops. One is more obvious than the
other. So, here once we have visited, a new
vertex, then we have to go through all its
outgoing neighbors, right. There is a scan
of all edges which are going out of u. So,
that is one loop, but also there is a loop
here which is kind of implicit which is before
we visit a vertex, we have to choose it, right.
So, we have to go through all the unvisited
vertices and pick the one whose distance is
minimum. So, this in general we have seen
that if we have a list or an array which is
not in any particular order, we have to find
the minimum and scan the entire array. So,
this is implicitly an order n step. So, this
is an order n step and that time it takes
here, it depends on how we represent the edges.
So, the outer loop runs n times we saw. In
each iteration, we burnt a vertex. This requires
an order n scan to find the minimum vertex
to burn. After we’ve burnt the vertex, we
have to scan its neighbors to update the burnt
times of those vertices. Now, if we have an
adjacency matrix as we have seen, then if
you are going to burn u now, then in order
to find its new neighbor, we have to scan
the row for u in the adjacency matrix. So,
this will take order n time, right. So, we
are in outer order n and inside we have two
order n things independent of each other.
One is to find the minimum burnt vertex, unburnt
vertex to burn next, and the second is to
update all its neighbors, right. So, because
we have this order n thing inside an order
n loop, overall its order n square. So, now
one of the bottlenecks certainly is this adjacency
matrix, right.
So, we have seen in bfs and dfs that if we
move from an adjacency matrix, to an adjacency
list scanning all the vertices of the particular
all the neighbors of the particular vertex
becomes more efficient. So, we can do the
same thing here, right. So, if we move from
adjacency matrix, from adjacency list representation,
certainly the second order n loop within each
iterations can be now counted as an overall
order n cost because across all the iterations,
we would explore every edge only once because
we explore when we burn its source vertex,
right. So, therefore, the second contribution
of order n gets solved by using an adjacency
list, but unfortunately we still have the
first order n step which is to find the minimum.
So, we have a list of burnt time associated
with the unburn unvisited vertices, and we
have to find the minimum among them and this
remains the order n step. So, overall though
we have moved to an adjacency list, this alone
does not help us because we still have an
order n step inside the big loop. So, we are
still at order n square.
So, actually, to get around this bottle neck,
we need to maintain the burnt times in a most
sophisticated data structure. So, it turns
out as we need data structure in which we
can of course find and remove the minimum
element quickly, but once we have that, we
also need to be able to update the values
quickly, so that overall both updating and
extracting are roughly equally the same. So,
this can be done using tree like structure
in particular we will see in a later lecture
that there is a nice data structure called
heap which precisely allows us to do these
two operations in log n time. So, if you have
n values, then log n time you can find and
read the minimum value and we can insert a
new value or update a value which is already
in a heap. All these operations take only
log n time.
So, if this which we will see later and if
this can be done, then what it says is that
finding the minimum burn time takes log n
time. Now, when we update the vertices which
are adjacent to the current burn vertex, overall
we do this O(m) times, right, because of O(m)
edges, but each updates again takes O(log
n). So, we have now two contributions to our
complexity. So, this comes from choosing the
minimum vertex, right. In order to extract
the minimum vertex, we do this n times and
each time it costs us log n time, and then
in order to update the distances once we burnt
a vertex, each time it takes the log n time,
but we do this for each edge. So, it is m
log n. So, we have n log n for choosing a
vertex and this is for updating a distance,
right. So, overall our the algorithm becomes
n plus m log n. So, remember that in a graph
n plus m is really a fact is the size of the
graph. So, this is really a n log n algorithm
as opposed to the naïve O (n square), and
we are seeing sorting and other such problems.
That is a huge practical jump going from O
n square to n log n. It is a huge jump in
term of the size of the problem we can hope
to solve.
So, Dijkstra algorithm makes a very crucial
assumption which underlies the correctness
of its greedy step, and that is that there
is no negative cost associated to the nature,
right. Our argument was that if we choose
v as the next neighbor to add to our burn
set, then we can never find the shorter path
coming this way, but obviously we have negative
edges, then we could have a situation where
I had say, a path of length 2 here, right
and then I chose not to follow another path
because may be it is have of length 4, but
if I have come back from there, right may
be this has length minus 3. So, if I come
around this way, then I incur net cost of
plus 1 whereas if I go this way, I get plus
2, right. So, therefore, by locally looking
for a nearest neighbor, I do not necessarily
find the shortest distance.
So, now of course you might want to ask why
you want to put a negative ways in a graph
at all. Well, remember that the graphs are
very general model. There are many situations
where you can actually interpret negative
ways in a sensible way. So, supposing we are
looking at say at a taxi driver and we are
looking at the graph as a list of places,
where he picks up and drop off people. Now,
obviously there are segments where that the
passenger is in the car and there are segments
where we may not have to be may not have a
passenger, he may have been returning to a
place to pick up. For instance, a taxi driver
operation there from the airport might typically
go back to the airport after a free trip because
he expects to find longer trips from there
can within the city, right. So, there are
segments where he travels empty, there are
segments where he has passengers. So, some
segments earn money, some segments use money.
So, there are some positive edges and there
are some negative edges, and the other situation
is completely unrelated to anything we have
seen so far.
You can think of say chemicals, chemical compounds
and we can represent the graph saying how
we transform one compound to other compound,
and here for instance edge weight can represent
the energy which is either released or absorbed
in this process. So, again it could be positive
or negative, right. So, there are many situations
in which edge, negative edge which actually
makes sense. So, what do we do here negative
edge weights?
So, first thing to notice that if you have
a negative cycle, so if I have a graph which
I have say a loop like this and all of the
things add minus 3, minus 2 and plus 1, then
if I go around the cycle once, right and come
back, then I will incur a total cost of minus
4. So, this means that if I had a path which
started somewhere else, came here and left
the cycle somewhere else. Suppose we had a
source and a target, then I can make the distance
in a source to the target arbitrarily small
by going round and round this loop many number
of times, right. At each time I go round the
loop, the cost reduces by minus, by 4. So,
I keep adding minus 4 to my cost. So, the
cost will be as low as I want just depending
on how many times I go around you.
So, if I have negative cycles in a graph,
the question of the shortest path does not
even make a sense. There is no notion of a
shortest path, because the quantity is not
well defined, but it turns out that if I rule
out this cycle, it could have negative edges,
but not negative cycle. So, for instance here
if instead of plus 1, I said that this was
plus 7, right. If I have made this way plus
7 and going around the cycle will cause me
plus 2. So, therefore, it does not help me
to go around the cycle because it only adds
to my cost. Therefore, in a situation where
I have no negative cycle, but I do have negative
edges, it still makes sense to talk of shortest
path, and we will see later that there are
other algorithms, other than Dijkstra’s
algorithm which can handle these. In particular
we will look at Bellman-Ford algorithm, and
we will also see that all pair shortest path
problems which generalize the single source
short path problem called the Floyd Warshall
algorithm. We will also solve these things
regardless of whether the paths are negative
or the weights are negative or not, provided
there are no negative cycles.